Zakareah Hafeez : 664465667
Khadija Hussain : 676250705

Reflecting upon our project, we would like to discuss specific methods we used to develop our grader, 
what we learned from developing a speech/text identifying algorithm, limitations we found along the way, 
and areas of improvement for the project and to the algorithm itself. Methods we used to develop our algorithm included 
creating a method to read in individual essay’s from the essay folder,  nltk, pos tagging, scipy, spacy, spellcheck, 
embeddings, and cosine similarity analysis. Nltk was utilized to tokenize words and tag them so that further grammar 
and syntax analysis could be executed. Scipy allowed for cosine similarity to be executed, which was then saved and used
later for coherence testing as well as essay topic relevance testing. Code was organized in functions relevant to the 
method being developed (i.e functions created for spell checking, topic relevance, etc.) and a corresponding raw score 
to scaled score (1 to 5 pt system) was developed for each method. Finally, the overall essay grade was established by 
utilizing the formula given by the professor, this formula utilized the scalar score of each respected functionality and 
mapped the score to either a high or low grade, with 28  and above being the threshold for high, and everything lower 
being a low score. This project allowed for us to learn the structural factors required to be developed when creating an 
objective speech/text grader. Although the basis of what can be considered a high/low grade essay is objective, we tried
our best to grade these structural elements to the best of our ability standardly. Two of the biggest limitations we 
found when developing our grader was the limitation in grade options (only having high or low as a grade) and the overall
grading function. The limitation in only having two grading options becomes a problem when grading an essay because that
assumes that an essay scored a point or two below the threshold automatically goes from a high graded essay to a low
essay , objectively there lies a problem. If the graded system included middle level grades rather than just two options,
we believe the results would have been better and more consistent. The overall formula that calculated grade was also seen
as a limitation, since certain scores were multiplied giving certain functionality more priority when answering the objective
question of “is the essay high or low graded”. Lastly, we found our work able to complete project requirements and match the 
expected grade with the calculated grade. Our results remained consistent with project expectations, we learned much 
from this project and have finished with a better understanding of text/speech recognition. 

